W-10804205-dw-testing-v2.4-cv (#116)
mulesoft/docs-dataweave: modules/ROOT/pages/dataweave-testing-framework.adoc

Use Snapshot Testing for your integration tests by storing the expected outputs as a separate file rather than as a string literal inside the test code.

You can create tests for your DataWeave mappings and modules by using the VSCode plugin,
(see Add DW VSCode plugin docs link, for instructions), or manually by following the next steps.

== Add the DataWeave Testing Framework to your Project

To enable the DataWeave Testing Framework in your project:

* Add the following Maven dependency to your project's `pom.xml` file:
+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
 <dependency>
   <groupId>org.mule.weave</groupId>
   <artifactId>data-weave-testing-framework</artifactId>
   <version>${data.weave.testing.framework.version}</version>
   <scope>test</scope>
 </dependency>
----

> == Tests Structure

Reviewer: I think this one should be plural

The following table shows the different files that compose a test, a description of their functionality, and their default location:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols=".^a,.^a,.^a"]
|===
| File | Description | Location
| DataWeave Mapping | The `.dwl` file that contains the mapping to test. | `src/main/dw/<package>/<mappingFileName>`
| DataWeave Test | The `.dwl` file that contains the actual tests and assertions to execute. | `src/test/dw/<package>/<testFileName>`
| Input | The file that contains the input to evaluate against the mapping. Depending on the test, this file is optional. | `src/test/resources/<mappingPath>/<scenario>/inputs/<inputFile>`
| Output | The file that contains the output to check against the results of the mapping. | `src/test/resources/<mappingPath>/<scenario>/<outputFile>`
|===

[[create-test]]
== Creating an Integration Test for a Mapping

To test a DataWeave mapping, create an integration test by following these steps:

. Create a `.dwl` file with a name ending in `Test` in the `src/test/dw/<package>/<testFileName>` folder
. In the test file’s header, import the `dw::test::Tests` and `dw::test::Asserts` modules

> . In the test file’s body, nest any number of sections (`“sectionName”`) followed by `describedBy`, and specify the test name at the end (`“testName”`) followed by `in do {<codeExecution/assertion>}`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the test file’s body, nest any number of sections (`“sectionName”`), followed by `describedBy`, and specify the test name at the end (`“testName”`) , followed by `in do {<codeExecution/assertion>}`.
```

. In the code execution and assertion part of the test file, specify the following:
** The `inputsFrom(<inputPath>)` function, to get the inputs to evaluate against the mapping
** The `evalPath(<mapping/scenario>)` function, to specify the mapping path
** The `must equalTo` matcher to check the results against the expected output specified by function `outputFrom(<mapping/scenario>)`

> . Add the expected inputs and outputs to the `src/test/resources/<mappingPath>` folder

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Add the expected inputs and outputs to the `src/test/resources/<mappingPath>` folder.
```

. If you want to configure the reader properties for the inputs, create a properties file with suffix `{fileName}-config.properties` in the `src/test/resources/<mappingPath>/inputs/` folder

=== Example Mapping Test

> The following example shows a DataWeave test that contains a DataWeave mapping file, an input file, a reader properties configuration file, an output file, and a test file with their corresponding locations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows a DataWeave test that contains a DataWeave mapping file, an input file, a reader properties configuration file, an output file, and a test file, respectively:
```

* DataWeave mapping in `src/main/dw/myPackage/MyMapping.dwl`
+
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json
---
{
 hello: "world"
}
----

* Input file in `src/test/resources/myPackage/MyMapping/NewScenario/inputs/payload.json`
+
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
{
"message": "Hello world!"
}
----

* Reader properties configuration file in `src/test/resources/myPackage/MyMapping/NewScenario/inputs/payload-config.properties`
+
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
streaming=false
----

* Expected output file in `src/test/resources/myPackage/MyMapping/NewScenario/out.json`
+
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
{
 "hello": "world"
}
----

* Test file in `src/test/dw/myPackage/MyMappingTest.dwl`
+
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
import * from dw::test::Tests
import * from dw::test::Asserts
---
"Test MyMapping" describedBy [
   "Assert NewScenario" in do {
       evalPath("myPackage/MyMapping.dwl", inputsFrom("myPackage/MyMapping/NewScenario"),"application/json") must
                 equalTo(outputFrom("myPackage/MyMapping/NewScenario"))
   }
]
----

== Create a Unit Test for a Module

To create a unit test for a module:

> . Create a `.dwl` with a name ending in `Test` in the `src/test/dw/<package>/<testFileName>` folder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Create a `.dwl` file with a name ending in `Test` in the `src/test/dw/<package>/<testFileName>` folder.
```
Must "Test" be init. capped?

Reviewer: Yes, the 'T' needs to be an Uppercase.

> . In the test file’s header, import `dw::test::Tests`, `dw::test::Asserts`, and the custom module you want to test, for example: `"MyModule"`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the test file’s header, import `dw::test::Tests`, `dw::test::Asserts`, and the custom module you want to test, for example, `"MyModule"`.
```

. In the test file's body, nest any number of sections (`“sectionName”`) followed by `describedBy`, and specify the test name at the end (`“testName”`).
. In the code execution and assertion part of the test, call the function you want to test (`functionToTest()`) and add an assertion against its result, for example: `must beObject()`

=== Example Unit Test for a Module

.Example `src/test/dw/MyModuleTest.dwl` file:
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
import * from dw::test::Tests
import * from dw::test::Asserts

import * from MyModule
---
"MyModule" describedBy [
   "something" describedBy [
       "It should do something" in do {
           something() must beObject()
       },
   ],
]
----

== Create an Integration Test for a Module

> To create an Integration Test for a Module:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create an integration test for a module:
```

> . In your test folder, create a DataWeave mapping that uses the module you want to test

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In your test folder, create a DataWeave mapping that uses the module you want to test.
```

> . Follow the steps in <<create-test, Creating an Integration Test for a Mapping>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Follow the steps in <<create-test, Creating an Integration Test for a Mapping>>.
```

= Testing DataWeave Libraries and Modules

The DataWeave testing framework enables you to build automated unit and integration tests for your DataWeave libraries and mappings. You can run tests to evaluate `.dwl` files and compare them to the output produced by the system you are testing. The framework provides a full suite of integration and unit test capabilities with a built-in set of assertion functions, and it is completely integrated with Maven and Surefire for your continuous deployment environment.

Use snapshot testing for your integration tests by storing the expected outputs as a separate file rather than as a string literal inside the test code.

You can create tests for your DataWeave mappings and modules either by using the VSCode plugin

> (see Add DW VSCode plugin docs link for instructions) or manually by modifying your project's `pom.xml` file.

Reviewer 3: VSCode -> VS Code

I'm wondering if we should use Visual Studio Code (VS Code) the first time we mention it above.

== Add the DataWeave Testing Framework to Your Project

To enable the DataWeave Testing Framework in your project:

* Add the following Maven dependency to your project's `pom.xml` file:
+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
 <dependency>
   <groupId>org.mule.weave</groupId>
   <artifactId>data-weave-testing-framework</artifactId>
   <version>${data.weave.testing.framework.version}</version>
   <scope>test</scope>
 </dependency>
----

== Tests Structure

The following table shows the different files that compose a test, a description of their functionalities, and their default locations:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols=".^a,.^a,.^a"]
|===
| File | Description | Location
| DataWeave Mapping | The `.dwl` file that contains the mapping to test. | `src/main/dw/<package>/<mappingFileName>`

> | DataWeave Test | The `.dwl` file that contains the actual tests and assertions to execute. | `src/test/dw/<package>/<testFileName>`

Reviewer 3: "actual  tests" -> "tests"

> | Input | The file that contains the input to evaluate against the mapping. Depending on the test, this file is optional. | `src/test/resources/<mappingPath>/<scenario>/inputs/<inputFile>`

Reviewer 3: Do the opening angle brackets show up in the build, for ex, in <mappingPath?

| Output | The file that contains the output to check against the results of the mapping. | `src/test/resources/<mappingPath>/<scenario>/<outputFile>`
|===

[[create-test]]
== Create an Integration Test for a Mapping

To test a DataWeave mapping, create an integration test by following these steps:

. Create a `.dwl` file with a name ending in `Test` in the `src/test/dw/<package>/<testFileName>` folder.
. In the test file’s header, import the `dw::test::Tests` and `dw::test::Asserts` modules.

> . In the test file’s body, nest any number of sections (`“sectionName”`), followed by `describedBy`, and specify the test name at the end (`“testName”`) , followed by `in do {<codeExecution/assertion>}`.

Reviewer 3: extra space before comma here: (`“testName”`) , followed

> . In the code execution and assertion part of the test file, specify the following:

Reviewer 3: Do you need a line below "following:", before the bullets?

. In the test file's body, nest any number of sections (`“sectionName”`) followed by `describedBy`, and specify the test name at the end (`“testName”`).
. In the code execution and assertion part of the test, call the function you want to test (`functionToTest()`) and add an assertion against its result, for example, `must beObject()`.

=== Example Unit Test for a Module

.Example `src/test/dw/MyModuleTest.dwl` file:
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
import * from dw::test::Tests
import * from dw::test::Asserts

import * from MyModule
---
"MyModule" describedBy [
   "something" describedBy [
       "It should do something" in do {
           something() must beObject()
       },
   ],
]
----

== Create an Integration Test for a Module

To create an integration test for a module:

. In your test folder, create a DataWeave mapping that uses the module you want to test.
. Follow the steps in <<create-test, Creating an Integration Test for a Mapping>>.

== Run the Tests from the Command Line

You can run the tests from the command line by running the `mvn test` command:

> * To run a single test, use: `mvn -Dtest=<MyMappingTest> test`.

Reviewer 3: use: -> use
